Test one, two, test, test, test, test, test, test, test.
My arm.
Look how small these things are getting.
Boy, Pat, you know, after four interviews, we want to cover the same material, but you did say to me once that you always start a book with an idea, a single idea.
Is that the same case?
Is that the case?
That's my mother.
I knew, even when Mom's dying, you know, I knew that, you know,
Because she was so young, because her death took us by surprise, because my mother had seemed immortal to me, I knew I was coming up with one of those big events.
And something that sheer helplessness of, you know, saying by watching your mother die, will you do anything for the woman and you can do nothing but watch and be a witness?
And so that was the single idea that began this book.
And what year did she die, by the way?
She died in 1984.
Okay.
So it was two years before the Prince of Ties.
Right.
So while you were working on it.
Well, yeah, I was trying to finish Prince of Ties.
Mom was dying.
Okay.
And so the idea was the death of the... Yeah.
But then how do you transform that idea into what... Not transform, but how does it germinate?
Well, it turns into something else.
I mean, it always...
You know, when I wrote this one, that was college life, when I wrote The Great Santana's Childhood.
I mean, that was the one idea.
And whatever alchemy takes place in, you know, these ideas becoming fiction, characters start appearing out of the mist.
Stories I've collected over the years, stories that I have loved.
There's one in this book that I've brought with me from college.
There's a Lost at Sea chapter.
And I had been trying to fit that in every book I have ever read.
And I finally found a place here.
Kind of like the tiger story.
Like the tiger story was out of my childhood.
And you refused to cut that out of your book?
Well, I had been carrying this tiger story.
But I had adored this tiger story.
You know, Nan tried to cut it out of The Prince of Times.
You know, I didn't want to.
Same case in this.
No, she didn't like it.
I mean, Nan goes nuts whenever she calls him my...
Oh, those animals again.
You know, she said, you know, Nan's from New York.
You know, when I have a manta ray in this thing, Nan does not understand.
To her, a manta ray is just, you know, seafood.
You know, she has no idea.
Seafood.
You know, if you can't eat it, you know, Nan doesn't want to even know about it.
And so she always, we always have a little bit of tension when any of these nature chapters come up.
Nan likes dinner parties.
But these are stories that you... These are silly stories.
It's carried with me from the South.
You know, my feeling is, and I think I'll say that in this piece, whatever...see, the guy who reviewed this for Time misses it.
And I think the person who ever reviewed it for PW got it.
What you are is, I think, our greatest living storyteller.
You know, here's one thing I know.
Any time is I love story.
One of the things I have that differs from the critical establishment is they seem to hate story.
They seem to loathe story.
And to me, story is the holiest thing.
It is what was told around the campfire.
It began narrative.
It began everything.
It is the most basic, primitive, prehistoric thing we have.
I don't like reading books that have none.
I just interviewed a woman Monday, and I really recommend this book to you.
It's called The Liar's Club, and it's amazing.
I got it.
I bought it.
It's great.
It's spectacular.
And she's just writing about two little years in her life, 61, 62, and 61, and 63, 62, 63.
And it's memory.
She didn't really try to verify the stuff, but it's telling these stories.
And what she said about...
She told me in the interview, I said, the voice is really something.
This will relate to you, because you told me years ago, the first storyteller you knew was this Greek guy.
I forget his name, stuff, whatever his name was, the grandfather.
Yes, yes.
Even though he didn't write, he told stories.
He was the first fiction writer you knew.
She said, this is an homage to my father.
The Liars Club is where they used to sit around and
and, you know, trade stories, and so they were all liars.
She said, this is an homage, the voice is an homage to my father.
And I said, because this is, she's telling stories here.
It's a memoir.
Who gives a shit about two years in East Texas to a dysfunctional family?
I mean, but you elevate it, and you make those care, and that's what storytelling, I think, is.
I'm going off on a tangent here.
I'm sorry, but I think this is kind of...
It's related to what you're saying.
It's the one thing I care about deeply.
It's... I want to see... Also, stories have to move me.
If I'm not moved, I will not write them.
You're what, 48, 49 years old?
I'll be 50 in October.
Wow.
Okay.
Well, I'm 52.
And I have to tell you, on my 52nd birthday, which was last month in May...
I told Alan Peacock, he said, what are you so sad about?
I said, you know who died on his 52nd birthday?
Shakespeare.
When Shakespeare died on April 23rd, he died on his 52nd birthday.
That's really depressing.
I'm so sorry you told me that.
Nick, shame on you.
He said, most guys, it's related with their father.
I said, oh, when I passed Keats at 26, and I mean, I've noted them all.
but on the actual birthday, I said, being 40, 50 didn't bother me at all, but anyway, you are approaching your 50th birthday.
Let's say you're kind of halfway through this experience.
Maybe you're halfway through the experience of being, and have you assessed your body of work to have a sense of what you've accomplished and where you're going with it?
This is a very general question, because all of your books, and we will get into the
as we have to, because everybody asks you about it.
And I saw one interview with Marley where you say, you kind of backed off the autobiographical element in the fiction just a little bit.
I know people think that everything I write happened.
Yeah, well, I mean, we have to be clear about that.
I'm talking generally, but have you assessed?
You know, this was, here's what, is I did not know how to go about being a writer, Nick.
No one has ever come up more innocently
I was this kid who moved every year with this Marine Corps father all throughout the South, the southern swamps, where the Marines loved to build their bases.
I had this ambition to be a writer because my mother wanted to be.
I didn't know how to do it.
I did not know writers.
I'm always amazed now on these writing programs.
We didn't have writing programs at the Citadel.
There was not a writer I could go to that could tell me how to do it.
You were going to say once, by the way, that anybody who wrote poetry at the, just to admit that you wrote poetry at the Citadel is to almost, is the equivalent of saying your game.
Oh, I mean, I was a writer.
I remember the, I had, someone remind me, this guy played baseball at the Citadel.
We were, we had played West Virginia, we were riding through the mountains, we were going to play VMI the next day.
So we were traveling at night in the stationery.
I had a great baseball coach named Chow Port, who later went into South Carolina Athletic Hall of Fame.
He was asking all the players what they were going to do when they graduated.
And Conroy said he was going to be a lawyer, and Holly Keller was going to take over his father's pianist.
He came to me and he said, Conroy, what are you going to be?
I said, I'm going to be a writer.
And the station wagon exploded in his laughter.
I just roared with laughter.
He said, come on, Conroy, you've got to make a goddamn living.
What are you going to be?
I said, I'm going to be a writer.
And they roared again.
So my assessment always takes in what I came from and the fact that I did not know quite how to go about it.
I did not know anybody who did it.
I had no examples except people I read about or books I read.
And so with that, I'm sort of amazed.
I'm astonished that this has worked.
in whatever way it's worked.
Excuse me, did you want to see it back?
You're talking about, of course, you start always wanting to be a writer.
And you become a writer.
I guess I'm still kind of looking for, you know, do you have an evaluation of your work?
Do you see your work as a corpus?
Yeah, it seems like there is a,
I think in your case... A single voice.
In your case, it really is a quietness.
Whether or not it's strictly autobiographical or not, we certainly are seeing aspects of your life in all of your books.
Yeah, I always love my family.
My brothers will tease me.
They'll say, you know, we may not know how members of the family will appear, the various guises that we'll put them in, but we always know that the hero...
will be a fabulous, sensitive, wonderful, caring, inhumane individual that Pat modestly bases on himself.
They're always teasing the hell out of me with that.
Well, have you had trouble?
Do you think it is one voice?
I think there is a—that voice is—certainly that narrated voice has come from within me somewhere.
What I get confused about is, you know, is that me?
Is that autobiographical?
Or is that the writer's voice?
It's a mystery to everybody.
I don't know.
You probably don't even stop to think about it.
I have not thought about it much.
Except, now, this particular book, the new one, you did write in the third person, right?
Nan told me to.
Was it hard?
I enjoyed it.
Then why did she suggest changing it back?
You know, I never asked her, but I thought she was right when she said it.
Yeah, it just seemed, you know, it seemed correct.
I was glad for the discipline of doing it, third person.
I liked that.
There were scenes I probably would have had a great deal of trouble writing in the first person, but because I did it in the third, I didn't even think about it.
You know, it's interesting.
This woman, Mary Carr, did she try to write this particular memoir?
Have you ever heard her?
Yeah, Monday.
I think it was just two days ago.
Is she around here?
She's actually going on, she's going to be out in the Hamptons this weekend, giving a talk.
Is that right?
Guildhall in East Hampton.
I have to know that.
She placed the story in the Hamptons magazine.
I wrote it fast yesterday.
I thought you must have... I wrote it yesterday.
I had a regular column on Bill Moyers this week, too.
Anyway, she said she originally tried to write this as an author.
And I said, well, what happened?
She said, I found that, how did she say it?
She said, I was too nice to myself in fiction.
I lied more about myself.
I made myself better than I was in real life.
And she found just the opposite.
I mean, she found that when she started to write it as a memoir, she had to tell the truth.
You know, I mean, it's interesting.
It's an interesting term where the fictional form,
actually, she found that she was kind of covering up a little bit.
Well, you were just the opposite, I guess, is what I'm driving at.
Too bad.
That's fine.
Let me chew.
Go ahead, please.
Why don't we just... Okay.
You just asked me an interesting question.
Yeah, what was it?
It was... She says she can...
Tell more truth in non-fiction.
Here's what I think.
I think if I was writing about my father in a non-fiction way, I never could have written about him as truthfully as I did in The Great Santee.
Fiction is where I go to tell the truth.
Good answer.
Great.
I love that.
Fiction is the place that I think truth could be.
The things that can be told that I cannot tell you, I can tell in fiction.
It's just easier?
It seems to me that the place where you tell the darkest secrets is fiction.
The place where I go to lie is not fiction.
It's the same thing this woman said.
I just can't help it.
Isn't that something?
She found that trying to write this.
Well, it was the other way around.
It was the other way around for her.
See, I have the totally opposite, when she said that, I have the totally opposite approach.
Okay, that's a terrific, you know, you said once, you've said to me and to others that your father's violence is the central fact of your art and life.
Do you still believe that to be the case?
Yeah, I have, the thing with Dad, I've even told Dad this, I said, Dad, my big surprise is because you're violent is that
Even though I did not beat my children or my wives or my friends, there's something about me that's a violent man.
It comes out of my books.
There's violence in all my books.
I think it came out in the... I could say something to one of my kids, hey, I could do... There's something that my kids were terrified of, that I know my wives were terrified of.
Because I was a large man.
I went to the synagogue.
I was raised by a Marine.
I could scare a child.
I could scare a woman.
I didn't even realize it for years and years.
I just could do it.
I could scare my men friends.
What?
This was a gift my father had passed on.
It's also in the gene pool.
A gift and a... And a curse.
A terrible curse.
It horrified me when I realized this.
I'm trying now.
You know, I have certainly dealt with Dad in the way he was.
As openly as anybody ever, you know, I have held my father accountable.
There is, you know, no one ever reads me, has any doubt that I was knocked around when I was a kid.
I bet your father still denies it.
Still denies it.
And your brothers validate it.
I guess the girls don't.
And the girls don't.
And who knows?
But, you know, I know what, you know, what happened.
I have no worry about that.
What I've been trying to concentrate on recently is that my father and mother gave me great gifts also.
My parents, my brother Mike is working at a bar for 20 years.
Yesterday, he's in Columbia, South Carolina.
And I went to lunch with my brother there.
And the owner of the bar came by.
He was talking about Mike.
And he said...
He said, anytime there's a big holiday, and my partners and I would say, we've got to get a Conroy to work at the bar.
A Conroy.
And all my brothers have worked there.
Wow.
And we've got to find a Conroy to work there.
I said, why?
He said, because your family's completely honest.
And he said, when you're at a restaurant, when you're at a bar, and you know who you can trust.
He said, you don't know this about your brother Mike.
Mike, I was eating with him.
He said, your brother Mike's from work here 20 years ago.
He said, after he worked here about 10 years, he said, I told him, Mike, if your family ever comes in, friends ever come in, you can give him a free drink anytime you want.
You've earned that.
So Mike said, thanks.
He says, Pat, he's never given anyone a free drink, including you.
He's never used it once.
When you said, I want to have a Conway here, I thought it was because they're tough.
Well, there's probably that, too.
But what he meant was he did not ever have to worry about steel.
Which was the Greek and the world's famous restaurant owners will tell you, is that the difference between a restaurant that survives and a restaurant that fails is how much you can control theft by the hell.
Is that right?
Yes, because the margins are so tight.
Well, he just, I mean, he just, you know, it was one of the things that I realized that my father was an honest man.
He...
instilled in us a great sense of ethics.
We have a great sense of right and wrong.
I'm trying to give him credit for this and give mom credit for this now, that these were things I did not concentrate on, but certainly I should have.
I certainly should have, you know, there was a great sense of duty, of discipline.
So without question, then, that question remains in the affirmative.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
You know, I interviewed, and I don't mean to throw these other quotes back, but it is interesting what other writers say.
I did an interview with Nadine Gortimer when she was up at Harvard last fall for these lectures.
Okay, she's written God knows how many books.
A million books.
But she said everyone, she compared each book, and she said it's like walking into a room, and there's one statue there.
And she said, for me, every book is like walking around and seeing different parts of the same statue.
Oh, great, thanks.
He said, I try to make every book different, but basically I'm telling the same story.
I guess this goes back to my earlier question about looking at your work as a body of work as if it's all different views of the same statue.
I'm sure it is.
Can you relate to that observation?
Yeah, and I seem to be trying to explain the world to myself as I go through it.
And I seem to be trying desperately to explain what this world is like to me as I travel through it.
So that's the primary force in your fiction?
I think so.
And the only way, apparently, that you can do it, then, is to, the only way you can explain your world is to write about your own world.
I'm sure people ask, has it ever occurred to you that it's impossible for you to write about a world that you don't know, people that you don't know?
Here's what, it's impossible for me to write people I don't know, certainly.
What is impossible is I must feel their emotion if I write about them.
If I cannot feel their story, if I cannot feel their agony, if I cannot feel what they have gone through, then it is of no interest to me.
That's especially important in the new book we're writing about the Holocaust.
No question, no question.
And that was agony.
That one moved through my bloodstream.
That one affected me a great deal.
And what moved you to...
As an Irish Catholic, I tried to presume, Southerner, to presume that you could do this.
Well, it was, I once, when I was in the middle of this book, I'd been interviewing survivors of the Holocaust and their children in Atlanta, Georgia.
I hired a researcher to interview others.
And I spoke, and this was in the 1980s, I spoke to the children of Holocaust survivors in Atlanta, and about 50 of them.
And we met in this room in the Jewish Community Center, and I said, I want to ask you all a question.
How can I write this book without you all hating my guts?
And it was a fascinating discussion.
Some of them said, you shouldn't write this book.
You're not Jewish.
You don't understand it.
Can I just interrupt?
You were fearful that they would hate your guts because you don't share the... First of all, I'm not Jewish.
I noticed people are understandably sensitive about other people, you know, roaring in to their stories.
I'd watch what happened to William Styron with Sophie's Choice.
I read a lot.
I saw Styron calling any Semites all over the place.
It's not Philip Roth calling it, Andy.
Yeah, Philip Roth calling it.
It just was...
And I know the Holocaust, you know, you go there at your own peril.
Indeed.
And I knew this.
So I told them that, you know, I didn't write this, that it's bad for a writer to ask permission to write sometimes.
I always thought that was not it.
And the story is going to tell that I had felt.
Well, you really depred me, but you really didn't ask their permission.
No, no.
Because you were going to do it.
No, I was going to do it.
I told them that.
And I said, the role that's always been interesting to me is the child of the survivor.
Because the thing I kept coming across was kids growing up in America, and here they were, and their parents went through the worst thing imaginable.
And over and over again during these interviews, I'd come across kids, you know, they'd do something wrong, and their mother would say, you're worse than Hitler.
This little kid, poor little kid.
And I went to Auschwitz for this.
And there was this thing, and I thought, what an incredible burden these children had.
And, you know, as their parents, and here they were trying to be just American children.
And I watched as I was growing up.
I had known some Holocaust, the children of Holocaust survivors.
And I just watched them, and I had known of one woman who had committed suicide.
And the thing that her parents had said, we will never go through anything worse.
And you can't say that, like, you can't challenge life like that.
Because what was worse was their child killing herself.
And it was not the Germans, the Nazis that killed her, it was their child killing her because of unhappiness she could not control.
The theme of suicide, it's something you don't want to talk about.
No, I'll be glad to.
heartbreaking that it has actually touched your life.
Even after you started this book, it begins literally on the opening page.
We had, of the seven children of my mother and father in this family, I think there have been five suicide attempts, one successful.
And five of us... You're talking about an oxymoron assessment.
Yeah, yeah.
One that worked.
It is, you know, but there has been great raging depression in this family, great anxiety in this family.
I mean, there's been a lot that has gone on in this family.
Does it help you deal with it as an individual by writing about it?
Well, the worst thing in this case is I had a, I went to a hideous depression in 1993, the end of 1993.
where I went through about my second or third suicidal episode.
It's fairly common with me.
I now have learned to, okay, here it is again.
Oh, great.
It's back here.
But this was the worst.
I had my worst one.
You actually schemed away?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Thinking of how physically you carry it out and stuff like that?
It is...
You know, I think if I thought of a gun, but then, you know, then that's, you know, somebody has to find you.
That seems bad.
I always like these things of the sea, letting the sea take you.
This has always had great appeal to me.
But then, and I also was writing the book about my brother who's schizophrenic, my youngest brother, Tom.
I called him John Harden in the book and was writing it and was very worried about him reading this.
Because he read everything, yeah.
And he would... As a finished book, you mean?
Yeah.
Not as a manuscript.
I was hiding this from him.
I was not telling him.
I was trying to figure out how to approach it with him.
The entire family had gone through a lot this time.
But clearly he was the individual who was energizing... No question.
No question.
Even though I had made up incidents with John Harden, I had made up dialogue that Tom had done.
It was not a big leap for anybody in the family to know who I was writing.
And I had had him in the book kill himself.
And so when my brother called to see it, it happened.
As I called man, I said, man, I can't take this.
I cannot...
I've got to change this.
And she said, whatever you do, it'll be great for the book.
Don't worry.
And Double Lee was wonderful.
Steve Rubin, you know, wrote down, take your time, don't worry, you know.
But my greatest concern... You are the franchise, by the way.
But my greatest concern was this, you know, I had to change that.
So I brought him back from the dead.
I just, okay, threw that chapter out and just said, okay, he's back.
Writing about it, is it therapeutic for you?
I mean, you told me about third major breakdown, near breakdown, depression.
I don't know whether it's therapeutic.
It does not seem... It's something you have to do, however, on the other hand.
It just seems like in this explaining life as I have lived in life to myself, I have to put in this, you know, there are times when people come to their limits.
There are times when people come to sadness they cannot bear.
It seems to me...
Putting that in reflects the truth of life as I have seen it, and I have lived it.
What do you see now?
Again, to go back to, I think, the first question as you approach the 50th birthday, where do you see the work going?
Here's the thing about 50, I think, I thought, holy Christ, 50.
Okay, you know, you've lived your first 50 years.
Remember when 50 seems impossibly old?
Oh, amazing.
Okay.
When the kids, guys go.
Yeah, I mean, at 50, I said, holy Christ, my hair has changed color, Jesus Christ.
And I can't imagine a little bit of that.
So I think, how many books can I write between now and time?
I go to see Jesus.
How many are in there?
And so for the first time, there's a finite number of books in a lifetime.
I don't think I've ever realized that before.
And I want to write them a little bit quicker.
This one took me a little too long.
This one probably took the longest time.
Yeah, it did.
There were distractions, at least.
A lot of distractions, a lot of distractions.
But you don't have to get into, which I write about elsewhere.
But I really hope that I can start writing these books a little more quickly.
You said that the last time.
You said that the last time we read that in 1987.
I know, I know.
But Robert Stone said that, too.
Did he?
Yeah, he said, I'm going to try and start.
How's he doing?
Is he writing quicker?
Well, that last book, Go to Bridge Reach, I thought was terrific.
I loved that book.
I like that guy's writing.
Yeah, he's terrific.
And that was kind of his Moby Dick book.
Does he live near you?
Is he around?
He's in Connecticut.
And actually, I am in New London, so he must read my stories.
I have to say, this is not a good take, but when I go anywhere here,
Okay.
Where's Toby live?
He lives in Syracuse.
In fact, this woman, Mary Carr, lives in Syracuse.
She knows him.
And I told her, I said, I think that I'm going to write this.
I think these are the two best memoirs of childhood.
This Boy's Life?
This Boy's Life and her book, of that early, early childhood and living with, you know, an odd mother and a father.
And where memory is the prism.
You don't go to the documents.
You don't have to check the actual dates from the newspapers.
What you remember is what's important.
And even if it's off a little bit.
I think that's right.
And that's what he said about his Vietnam book.
He didn't keep a journal.
He said, no, I remembered what was important.
He said, the stuff that I remembered is the stuff that's important.
I want to tell you what I was amazed at.
that he and his brother had these two different downloads, and they were both unbelievable.
Did you see the PW piece I did on him?
No, no.
I should send it to you.
It was a pretty good piece.
There's PW interviews now, too.
Is that right?
You know, those interviews and publishers?
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Anyway.
That's so funny.
I guess this is kind of a throwaway question.
Have you discovered what's important in life?
You already told me that, I think, unless you want to say anything more about it.
When your mother was dying in 1984, and she did say to you, this one's about me, and this was, of course, this next book was about, she knew it, didn't she?
Yeah, she did.
I mean, there was, you know, Mom had the idea that Dad was by far the second best character I had to write about.
No, there's no question.
She thought Dad was strong but shallow, you know, mean but uninteresting.
But she told you you were a lousy writer.
Told me I was a shitty writer.
Yeah, you said that, you know, you did not know, you did not understand who the real power of that household was.
You did not understand that I was the one that ran that house, not your father.
That he had his fists, but he did not know how to reign.
I mean, she was...
You've described this book as, or somebody has described it as Jack as a man on the run from his past.
Is that a fair assessment?
Yeah, I think it is.
Does that describe you?
I think it does.
I think there has been something about me.
There's been something restless about me my entire life.
There's been something, there's been something, there's been too much movement, too much, not enough stillness in my life.
I'd like to get more.
Um,
And you've also said before how difficult it is for you to express, you said you can easily express love to people, but you still have a very difficult time.
Feeling it, is that... Yeah, I think the hardest thing in America right now for all of us is to feel anything.
In other words, I watch these talk shows sometimes.
I'm stunned.
And I think what it is is a desperate...
desperate attempt of somebody to connect with other people.
And to feel anything seems like a gift in America.
We have so much thrown at us.
There is so much event.
There is so much horror that we see every single day that we have blocked it out so much.
I think it's hard for all of us to feel a single thing.
Is it the malaise of our times?
Are we no longer an innocent nation?
I don't know.
I don't know what it is.
I just...
I just know that people seem surprised if they can feel anything at all.
Do you find that there was some concern, certainly, by people who don't know you and maybe didn't have the confidence in your ability to bring it, as they say in the, anymore, you know, baseball, to bring the fastball, and it took, what, nine years.
Did you ever have any anxiety about that maybe you couldn't?
do this anymore?
Or was it the distractions?
The anxiety I had was that I never knew I'd be following a success.
That was a great surprise to me.
I thought I'd write these books.
An overwhelming success.
Yeah, that just shocked me.
I mean, I did not know.
I would read about it.
I would read about people that happened to, like Irvin.
And it's sort of magical.
You don't know how that's going to happen.
You don't know where that's going to come from.
And I just watched it.
It never occurred to me that would happen to me.
You never expected that from Princess?
You just never did.
You know, that was coming out of the same river the other books had come out of.
And I figured it would have the same... It seemed to me there was a nice art to my career.
They still wanted to publish them.
The movies were still done.
I said, this is very nice.
The movies kept me from having to teach in college.
Um...
So it seemed to me I was leading a very lucky life.
I was in the middle of a lucky life when the Prince of Times took off.
And I did not, and Nan said something that, I did not write for a year after Nan told me this.
She said, now you know what my husband Gates at least goes to, to sit down and write a book worth a million dollars.
And I had never assigned a book.
And he went through it.
He went through it, yeah.
And it never occurred to me a book I was writing was worth anything.
She did it.
But do you feel that the expectation is now?
Does it hurt your work?
Yeah, I don't know.
And we'll find out with this book.
What I did not want to do was this, was being successful to change the thing that brought me to the writing table, that had brought me to this career in the first place.
That there was passion, you know, when I sat down.
I felt passionate about the subject I was writing about.
I felt emotional that I, uh,
could write things that moved me.
And so, you know, what I found out, if I could move myself, sometimes I could move other people.
What I did not want to do was something cheap, a throwaway, something just to write a book, but something that sprang from the same thing that made me ambitious to be a writer in the first place.
When I saw you at the EBA in L.A.
last year, the book was essentially done, right?
No, no.
Oh, no.
That was a lie.
I said at that luncheon in front of you and in front of Nan, I said, deadline novelist.
And she said, oh, no, no, no, no.
It was actually true.
He's like a deadline.
He's making an 11 a.m.
deadline.
I felt like a fraud.
They shouldn't have put that pressure on me.
At that ABA, I said, yeah, this is...
These people now have nothing to sell.
Who knows?
You know, I sat with a guy.
My book went right in the next ABA, Helios.
But, you know, there was a guy there from AA, William Henry III, that I had a nice chat with, and he knew my work.
This guy drops dead a week, a month later.
He was AA.
Hey, sweet guy.
Who the hell knows what's going to happen, right?
Who the hell can... I met him at that ABA.
I met him at that same lunch.
He whispers.
He was sick, by the way.
When he died about three weeks later, I'm sure it was that lingering...
the moment that he had, he worked himself like that.
He was whispering because he was sick.
Do you remember when he whispered?
He was whispering like that, and he said, I'm sorry, I got a bad call, and I didn't have a feeling that he dropped dead.
He was dead.
He was younger than me.
Two Pulitzer Prizes.
What the fuck good is it going to be?
I was stunned by that.
It killed me because I liked him so much.
He was such a sweet guy.
He was so sweet.
He really was.
That book was good, too.
The book was good.
I got a lot of stuff here.
What do you think?
Is love still a mystery for you?
You know, you and I have covered so much territory.
Your love of food is in here, the research for the book.
You did a lot of research for this book.
I did a ton of research.
You know, the Holocaust, you do not want to, you do not come to that lightly.
You do not research that lightly.
And I got interested in that.
I got, these stories hooked me.
We mentioned earlier we were talking about getting permission from these people.
You weren't asking for permission, and there is a connection to Prince of Tides when your sister Carol actually begged you not to write about to Bay Savannah, and you did anyway.
Have you resolved with the sister, by the way?
Not quite.
Carol and I have, you know, we have diplomatic contacts out now.
But she was pissed.
She came to my brother's funeral.
And it's the first time we've seen each other since my mother's funeral ten years before.
And it's still painful.
Wasn't this a book?
I don't think it was a book.
She quit seeing me at Mom's funeral.
Mom died two years before the book came out.
So it could not have been The Prince of Tides.
I was writing about her in The Prince of Tides.
She had one of these weird shrinks.
There's a kind of shrink that's going on in America.
It suggests that the patient not have anything to do with their families.
That, you know, the family is the toxic family.
I wrote a book about this.
Yeah.
It's a very destructive thing, I think.
And Carol had one of those shrinks.
And they take over these people.
Yeah.
And because the shrinks said that we were bad, you know, she listens.
I don't know when or if that will ever be resolved.
I hope.
What can I say?
Do you have an idea about what the next book is?
Are you giving it some thought?
I want to do an Atlanta novel.
You know what?
You're kind of mad at Atlanta these days.
We have a little anger here.
Yeah, I had that thing with college.
Yeah, which I've heard about.
I was born in Atlanta and lived there much of my adult life.
I've just been watching the city grow.
been taking notes and collecting stories, and I have no idea what form that will take now, but I'll try and, you know, I think that's going to be the next.
You're hoping you can do it within five years or so?
I pray.
I'll probably be seeing you when I'm 60.
Well, I hope we get to see each other before that.
I got plenty of stuff, Pat, if you wanted to... No, keep going.
Let's just... You said also that this started out as a brother's book on one of your interviews.
Mm-hmm.
Yeah, I have these brothers I have found hilarious.
And these brothers are like rocks.
They're very supportive.
I mean, they could not have been nice.
Throughout my career, they could not have been nice.
They buy the books, they read the books, they laugh about the books.
So when I told them I was doing this, they said, this is great.
It's not like my sister cuts me off.
They said, this is wonderful.
Make me say this.
And they go through routines with me.
But we have this thing that I have loved.
We have what the brothers call adventures together.
They will pick a river and canoe down the river.
And honestly, I'm amazed how funny they are.
They are good company.
They are nice-skinned men.
And I realize I've mostly written about sisters and have never written about these guys.
And what I love when I was writing this book is Mike's wife came up to me, Jean, and came up to me and she says, in fact, can I ask you a favor?
I said, certainly.
If you're writing about Mike, will you put me in just a little cameo?
I said, sure, Jean.
And she says, will you do me a great fit?
I said, sure.
She says, can I have huge bosoms?
I've wanted them my entire life.
I said,
I said, they'll be giant, Gene.
That's what you truly want.
She said, thank you so much.
She's a little southern girl.
And you did it.
Yeah.
Gene, you're huge.
It's a small little thing.
It tickles me now of this thing.
But I wanted, because part of the reason I write is a celebration of these people.
I'm a great admirer of these people.
I feel fortunate to be born and have been brought up with them.
You know, my father and I, you know, my father, he says, son, we're going national this time.
We were getting this vanity fair.
He says, I think we're going national.
Did he still sign his Christmas cards?
The Great Santana, he still signs them.
And in that shoot in the Vanity Fair, I couldn't believe they brought a stylist down.
I mean, I'm looking at this stuff.
I said, Dad, what the shit is it?
And they made me wear these white hats.
I said, Dad, they're making me wear that fucking white hat because I was a Southern.
Wear it, son.
I'm wearing this one.
I said, why are you wearing this hat, Dad?
He says, I made a deal with a photographer.
I get to keep both hats, son.
Then he wore suspenders.
I said, he doesn't wear suspenders.
You know, I said, I get to keep all the suspenders.
Like Michael Jordan's father wearing all that stuff.
He's not working his own deals if they can.
Exactly, exactly.
You know, I said, Dad, this is embarrassing.
I love that line when Santini, the Oscar nominations came up and he called and said, I guess he was assuming that he got
He said, son, you and I got nominated for Academy Award last night.
You might have didn't get shit.
You might have got nothing.
All right, let's take a look at the notes here.
I think we've got lots of stuff here, lots of good stuff.
I haven't really questioned you about the book.
The book, that's my job.
That's your job.
I mean, never worry about that.
That's my job.
Also, you can call me anytime.
You're going to have to give me an address so I can send you the book.
Just tell me again the significance of beach music.
Was it always beach music?
Beach music, the title?
Yeah, I came out of that title.
It's a, I don't know, did Molly give you the tape?
They got tape?
No.
She got tape so you can hear beach music.
Beach music was a kind of dance.
The shag was the dance on the southeastern coast when I was growing up in South Carolina.
And they had these peers.
And one of the reasons these bands would come, and it was like the first time
The first time that I saw real integration takes place in South Carolina because black bands would come to play for white kids.
And they would have white bands going to play for black kids at colleges.
And what was in common was this kind of music that came out.
The Drifter saved the last dance for me.
I don't know if you remember that.
It was one of my favorite songs in my childhood.
That was a classic beach music song.
And we'll get this tape from her because it was just a thing of...
The whole phrase, beach music, evokes something of that time and that period and that music.
You know, what it is, it's like Bruce Madeline for me.
When I hear this music, it is my childhood coming back to me.
And it did seem to have this resonance for the whole... It seemed something hit with that.
Nan liked it right away.
Nan just, you know, that's it.
She said, don't you?
And she said, I don't want those goddamn kings, queens, and princes.
She said, I'm tired of that.
Them lords, I'm sick of that.
I love the book, by the way.
I love it.
Well, good, good.
If you just like it, I'll be very happy.
Well, I'll be very pleased to share this with four million readers.
Well, good.
This is a, I have, but let's get that thing going.
Can I just take a cup?
This illustration here, right after page 14, that's the Piazza Farnese.
Is that right about?
And, you know, I can see why they did that.
That's my apartment around.
Oh, wow.
Pointing to the top.
Yeah, no one knew it.
This was an accident.
Oh, that's wild.
There's one more.
There's one more that surprised me even more.
Do me a favor.
This is Ellen's book.
It's on my book.
What page do you have?
One page.
What is page 13?
Sorry, part one.
Page 13?
Yeah.
Would you just click, draw an arrow, and say my apartment?
Okay.
I'll figure this.
Just make this kind of... I've never done this.
This is amazing.
This is a good idea.
Oh, it's wonderful.
Are you serious?
You see how I'm making this a distinctive look?
Okay.
But what's the other one?
The other one, just completely.
Let's see what we're doing.
This is the artist thing.
This is Jack McCall's house he grew up in Waterford.
Right.
This is the artist's rendition.
This is 39 Church Street in Charleston, South Carolina.
My best friend in Charleston, a woman I was in love with.
Sally Sinkler lives here.
I can... Let's just say this has a personal... Okay.
No.
I stayed at this house before I got a job.
Like that, man.
Okay, this is, let me show you this.
This is how, this was Sally and Dana Sinker.
That's their house.
This woman just picked out a book on the shop, isn't it?
Isn't that amazing?
That is amazing.
Oh, you can't even do that.
Oh, I love this.
I got a buddy waiting in the house.
He's going to kill me.
That's fine.
That's great fact.
This is 39 Church Street.
Wow.
That's my copy.
This is a... Isn't that amazing?
You just don't know that stuff.
Now, do you want to lay on the floor?
No, I want to do a blurb now.
I want to know who you're trying to get to.
I'm trying to get to people who like good stories, who are interested in writing.
This book is not just for book collectors, I guess, is what we're trying to do.
The book of our books is also a great story of obsession, passion.
Help me, help me.
Obsession, passion.
I mean, there are just dozens of stories.
My model for this was God's Graves and Scholars, which took an arcane subject and made it accessible.
Human nature, I guess, is but... Obsession, obsession... A great deal.
Okay, a great deal of obsession, passion.
Okay...
And a hundred terrific, unforgettable stories.
More than a hundred.
Huh?
There's more than a hundred.
Okay.
And hundreds?
Hundreds.
Okay.
Dozens, scores.
Okay, and hundreds.
Unforgettable stories.
About the love of books.
About the passion for books.
Okay.
Did you say passion already?
Passion, okay.
About the love of books?
Sure.
About the madness for books.
About the madness.
Is that all right?
Yes.
The madness surrounding the requirement of books.
About the madness.
What do we say here?
Okay.
These are just a few.
This book includes a
How is the madness of collecting books?
It's a celebration of books and the people who have gathered and preserved them over the centuries.
It's not just collecting, it's also saving and passing on, and it's respect for the book, it's love for the book.
Not just as objects, but for what they contain, too, I think.
How about this?
A book?
A lot of books.
There's also a great tale of obsession, passion, and hundreds of untold
Unforgettable stories about the madness surrounding the world of books.
Wonderful.
Okay.
Let us sign it so we don't know who's here who wrote it.
This.
How about that?
Okay.
You got a phone number?
Yeah.
Where can I send you a finished copy?
Okay.
Here.
I'll be happy to send it to Doubleday anywhere you want.
Send these to Doubleday.
I'm on the road now.
Okay.
I'm not even home.
Do you want that pen?
No.
I did not steal a pen.
No, but it's a nice pen, though.
It's good for them.
I've got to run because my buddy is downstairs.
I'm serious.
Thanks so much.
I would never leave.
You want my card?
Here's my card.
Okay, I got it.
Because who am I going to give this to?
The Greek.
Am I being opportunistic by... You have to show your book.
Welcome to my world.
If I send you a gentle magic here, you'll get it.
Absolutely nothing.
Send it to Marley.
Just make sure.
And enjoy seeing you.
Okay?
Thank you.
I've got to run, OK?
All right.
Oh, my God.
.
It's better.
Sorry, we were up to enough that there was a lion too.
And the lion came back.
Thank you.
the the the
... ...
Oh.